# Zipadee

Zipadee is a simple Node HTTP server that aims to be **Safe**, **Fast**, and
**Easy to Use**.

> [!CAUTION]
> Zipadee is very early, under construction, will change a lot, and may never be
> sufficiently maintained for any level of use. If you want to try it, please
> consider contributing!

> [!IMPORTANT]
>
> I'm looking for collaborators for Zipadee! I don't have enough time to make
> Zipadee a well-supported project on my own, and I can't possibly use it in
> enough different cases to shake out all of the basic features and initial
> bugs. If the goals and principles of the project speak to you, reach out!

Zipadee is inspired by Koa and Express, with the following goals:

- Safe: The easiest way to respond with HTML is escaped by default to protect
  against XSS
- Lightweight: Minimal features and dependencies
- Fast: Highly optimized routing and template rendering. VM friendly code.
- Ergonomic: Usability improvements on raw Node HTTP APIs
- Familiar: App and Middleware APIs similar to Express and Koa
- Simple: A small layer over Node's HTTP API
- Great TypeScript support:
  - Written in TypeScript so typings are always included and accurate
  - Objects have fixed shapes that are easy to type
- Convenient: The most common needs are easy to address, whether with a built-in
  feature or first-class middleware.

#### Hello World Example:
```ts
import {App, html} from 'zipadee';

const users = ['Alice', 'Bob'];

const app = new App();

app.use(async (req, res) => {
  res.body = html`
    <h1>Hello world!</h1>
    <h2>Users:</h2>
    <ul>
      ${users.map((user, i) => html` <li>User ${i}: ${user}</li> `)}
    </ul>
  `;
});

app.listen(8080);
```

## Performance

Initial benchmarks (using Fastify's benchmark, for now) show that Zipadee is
neck-and-neck with Fastify, one of the fasted Node web servers out there.

|            | Version | Requests/s | Latency (ms) | Throughput/Mb |
|:-----------|:------- |:---------- | :----------- | :------------ |
| fastify    | 5.6.1   | 109446.4   | 8.63         | 19.62         |
| zipadee    | 0.0.21  | 108084.8   | 8.77         | 20.00         |
| koa        | 3.0.1   | 89817.6    | 10.64        | 16.02         |
| koa-router | 14.0.0  | 84689.6    | 11.32        | 15.10         |
| express    | 5.1.0   | 68682.4    | 14.07        | 12.25         |

This is just the very first benchmark run, and the Fastify benchmark is very
simple. It's possible that there are more optimizations to be made.

### What makes Zipadee fast?

- Fixed object shapes and known object types: No context. No replacement or
  patching of request or response objects.
- Highly optimized routing. `@zipadee/router` uses
  [`url-pattern-list`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/url-pattern-list) which
  matches URLs against a collection of patterns using an efficient prefix-tree.
- Optimized streaming of `html` templates. `html` templates avoid generators and
  iterators and write directly into Node streams for the lowest possible
  overhead.

## Principles and features

### Fixed object shapes

One of the biggest differences from Koa, and many other web server frameworks as
well, is that Zipadee doesn't encourage middleware to change the shape of
objects as a standard way of passing data between middleware or plugins -
whether adding new properties to objects or changing the types of properties.

Changing object shapes are hard for everything that deals with code to
handle well: VMs, compilers and type-checkers, and humans.

For instance, in some other server frameworks, middleware will often add new
properties to a context object. Later middleware will access those properties,
and only work if the first middleware is present, but there's very little to
tell code readers about that dependency.

Zipadee doesn't have a context object, but instead encourages middleware that
needs to vend data to other middleware to do so via lookup APIs.

Zipadee also doesn't include a way to replace the Request and Response classes,
so middleware always knows the types of objects that it is receiving.

#### Examples of alternatives to context

##### Get data from Request and Response objects with helpers

Consider a CSP middleware that helps set the Content-Security-Policy
header and generate nonces to use in HTML generated by downstream middleware.
Instead of adding a `nonce` property to a context, the middleware can offer a
utility function to get the nonce from the Response object. This function can
read from a WeakMap keyed by the Response (it could add a property to Response
too, but Zipadee discourages that).

```ts
import {csp, getNonce} from 'some-zipadee-csp-package';

app.use(csp({styleNonce: true}));

app.use(async (req, res) => {
  // The getNonce() function can give nice error messages if the csp()
  // middleware wasn't used, and it can have nice hover-over docs for developers
  const styleNonce = getNonce(res);
  res.body = html`<style nonce=${styleNonce}`>...</style>`;
});
```

##### Use functions instead of middleware

Request body parsing is commonly done with middleware, but to pass the parsed
request body to downstream middleware, parsers for Koa or Express often modify
the Request object. This reads the body stream before other middleware can, and
changes the type of the body (say to JSON). Given that these changes can cause
downstream bugs, Zipadee encourages using simple functions instead. Middleware
that needs to parse the request body as JSON can just use a function:

```ts
import {parseBody} from 'some-body-parser';

app.use(async (req, res, next) => {
  const json = await parseBody(req);
  //    ^ this is typed nicely as a JSON object. No guessing
});
```

If multiple readers need access to the parsed body, `parseBody()` could cache
the result in a WeakMap.

### Safety

Zipadee aims to have safe default behavior. Part of this is treating all text
responses as plain text by default, and only responding with a MIME type of
`text/html` (or other) if the developer specifically sets the type or uses the
built-in `html` template tag.

```ts
import {App, html} from 'zipadee';

app.use((req, res) => {
  // This is treated as plain text
  res.body = '<h1>Hello World!</h1>';
});

app.use((req, res) => {
  // This is treated as HTML
  res.body = html`<h1>Hello World!</h1>`;
});
```

In Koa, when a response body is a string it is scanned for what looks like part
of an HTML end tag ("`</`") and if it's found, Koa automatically sets the MIME
type of the response to `text/html`. This too easily allows mixing of trusted
nad untrusted content, which can lead to XSS vulnerabilities.

Zipadee's `html` template tag automatically escapes untrusted interpolations.
Developers must use the `unsafeHTML()` utility to interpolate
non-template-literal strings, encouraging developers to think about safety
up-front.

### Built-in HTML templating

Zipadee's `html` template tag offers a number of conveniences that may eliminate
the need for a separate HTML template system like Liquid or Nunjucks:

- Automatic escaping\* of untrusted interpolated strings
- Composition of nested templates
- Support for arrays: Makes it easy to build lists without having to use
  `arr.join('')`, and supports streaming.
- Pretty-ish-printing: Templates can be automatically dedented and nested
  templates re-indented when a nicer looking output is desired.
- Streaming and asynchronous template support: Zipadee streams each chunk of a
  template as its ready, and automatically waits for Promises in the stream.

  ```ts
  app.use(async (req, res) => {
    // Render the shell ASAP, render the body when data is loaded
    res.body = html`
      <html>
        <head>
          <script type="module" src="./app.js"></script>
          <link rel="stylesheet href="./app.css">
        </head>
        <body>
          ${renderBody(req)}
        </body>
      </html>
    `;
  });

  const renderBody = async (req) => {
    const data = await getData(req);
    return html` <h1>${data.title}</h1> `;
  };
  ```

\*Zipadee's `html` tag does not yet perform contextual auto-escaping, which
requires parsing the HTML templates, so it's still possible to create unsafe
attribute values like `javascript:...`.

### Batteries included

Utilities like `compose()` and `mount()` are core to using middleware correctly,
and help define some of the semantics of middleware, so they are built-in to
Zipadee.

`compose()` specifically is use by the `App` class to compose the top-level
middleware. Including it is one less dependency in core.

`mount()` defines in part how middleware should handle paths. It doesn't modify
a Request's URL object, but the Request's `path`, so all middleware should use
the `path` property to make sure that it can be mounted properly. Because of how
important that is, `mount()` is built-in.

## First-party middleware and utilities

This monorepo contains several useful utilities as separate packages:

- [zipadee](./packages/zipadee/README.md): A convenience package that re-exports
  core, cors, router, and static.
- [@zipadee/core](./packages/core/README.md): The core web server
- [@zipadee/cors](./packages/cors/README.md): CORS middleware
- [@zipadee/dev-server](./packages/dev-server/README.md): A simple dev server
  CLI that combines the static and javascript middleware.
- [@zipadee/javascript](./packages/javascript/README.md): Middleware that
  rewrites JavaScript imports to be browser compatible
- [@zipadee/router](./packages/router/README.md): Router middleware
- [@zipadee/static](./packages/static/README.md): Static file serving middleware
  and utilities
- [@zipadee/trpc](./packages/trpc/README.md): tRPC middleware

## TODO

There are many, many things to be done if Zipadee is ever going to be real, but
here's a few of them:

- [ ] Web site
- [ ] Finish `@zipadee/static`
- [ ] Finish `@zipadee/router`
- [ ] Benchmarks (Use Fastify's? It's maybe too simple)
- [ ] Body parsers (and JSON Schema validation for JSON bodies?)
- [ ] `@zipadee/csp` package that makes it easy to set CSP headers and to create
      nonces and use them in other middleware.

  ```ts
  import {getNonce} from '@zipadee/csp';

  app.use((req, res) => {
    res.body = `<script nonce=${getNonce(res)}>...</script>`;
  });
  ```

- [ ] `@zipadee/etag` (or `@zipadee/cache`?) - easily set ETag header from
      content. Maybe it could be used by `@zipadee/static`.
- [ ] http2: test against Node's compatibility layer, offer a switch?
  - Local cert generation for local HTTP/2 dev servers?
- [ ] `@zipadee/compress` midleware
- [x] `@zipadee/trpc` midleware
